Right now, Claw Code's memory system is
still way behind a lot of what the open-
source community has already figured
out. So, in a recent video, I broke down
these seven levels of clawed memory
systems. And whilst researching that, I
ended up digging through some really
advanced setups that people are building
right now. Setups like the Hermes agent,
memarch, and a bunch of others. And to
my own surprise, a lot of these systems
looked incredibly advanced, but the core
ideas underneath them are actually very
simple to replicate. So underneath all
the complexity, it always comes down to
just two questions. When and how does
information get written to memory? And
when and how does it get retrieved
again? So in this video, I'm going to
show you what claw codes memory looks
like today, what the newer systems
actually doing differently, and then the
setup I'd actually recommend if you want
claw code to stop forgetting things. And
one thing up front, this isn't about
loading more context into claw code.
It's about keeping context lean, only
retrieving the right information when
it's actually needed. So, let's get into
it and we can start off by talking about
the three questions that every memory
system has got to answer. So, firstly,
it's all about storage. How does
information actually get saved and at
what point? So, what happens when
somebody says something to Claude that's
worth remembering? How does that
actually get stored in the system? So
you might say our landing page is
school.com/scrapes
and you want Claude to always remember
that information. So in some way we want
the agent to actually go away and save
that and we want that to be consistent
and reliable or a decision like we're
using Stripe not PayPal. Same thing you
want that to be saved into the memory
and then retrieved at a later date. So
we want to understand how does
information get saved with all these
different memory systems. Then we want
to understand how information gets
injected. So you're probably familiar
that the claude.mmd file gets injected
into the system prompt whenever we
prompt claude. So it's injected every
single time. So how do we actually take
important context of recent memory and
push it to the agent during our
conversation so that next time you do
start a session you can open claw code
and the memory of the most recent or
most important information is loaded in
automatically but it's only a snippet of
that information. It's not tens of
thousands of tokens. We have a small
curated always there set of memory
that's pushed in. So that for example
Claude already knows your landing page
URL or already knows your Stripe
decision because we made that and that's
an important decision. So we've got
storage and injection. But then more
importantly for long-term memories, how
do we actually go and find and recover
past information that we've told it?
Information that we told it about client
X 6 months ago. That's the information
that we need to be able to recall. And
this could be as recent as last week or
it could be, you know, several years ago
or months ago. So we might ask, what did
we decide about pricing last Tuesday?
And it might have a step-by-step process
of let's check what's been loaded in the
injection phase. If not, let's go
deeper. And if not, let's go even
deeper. And we need a framework to
actually store and retrieve that
information from the long-term memory.
So how does it store? How does it
inject? And how does it recall? So these
are the three themes that we're going to
follow through this video and talk about
the different systems like claw code out
the box Hermes and memarch which are two
of the best systems that I've found on
the market. They often take completely
different approaches. So let's get into
the first section which is all about
storage. So when you have a conversation
with Claude it's actually autodetecting
certain things you say in the background
and writing them silently to MD files.
These are stored at a per project level
in the global space. So we've got the
clawude project/ projects and then we're
storing memory folders back there. We
then have a memory.mmd index which is
updated with all the files for which it
can point to. So when you have a
conversation in the future with Claude,
it can always reference those files. Now
this is on a per project basis. But if
you repeat things multiple times and you
have certain things, certain preferences
that are done three or more times, then
it gets promoted to a
global.claude/memory
folder. And you can actually see this if
you go directly into your claw code
terminal and do /memory. It will say do
you want to look at your user memory
which is saved in the claw.md? Do you
want to look at the project memory which
is also MD or do you want to open the
automemory folder. So if you open that
automemory folder then you can actually
go and see all of the files and the
index of files that that's created and
you can see that those actually point to
each other. So these are happening
automatically in the background and I
wouldn't say they're very comprehensive.
is kind of mostly if you're telling it
this is a really important thing but
otherwise it's not really going to store
a huge amount of information. Now let's
look at what the open- source community
has figured out around this. So how do
they store and capture information as
you go through? So memarch uses a clawed
code stop hook. So it's going to fire
after every turn not just the memory
worthy turns. So, it's going to call
Haiku, which is going to summarize each
turn into bullets. And it uses Haiku
because it's a cheap fast model, and
it's doing it all the time. It's going
to append that data to a memory/ date
file with session anchors. So, you know,
when you close a session and you have a
specific session ID, it's going to
append that or the notes from that
session to a specific memory file. So,
it's storing literally everything. It
then periodically runs memarch index or
you can run this manually. Each bit of
information gets chunked into a hash.
Now, the reason it's converting that
information into a hash is because it
can then embed those chunks and turn
them into vectors. Those vectors are
then stored in a mil vector database.
And it's all done locally on your CPU.
So, there's zero API cost. And what this
actually means for you, it's not very
relevant in terms of what it's being
stored as. It's being stored as vectors.
So, literally a sequence of numbers. But
what it does is store really effectively
a meaning and a bunch of metadata
associated with that specific memory.
This is great for the retrieval stage
later because it means we can actually
retrieve information by meaning instead
of just by keyword search. So not only
do we have the markdown files,
everything is also indexed and
vectorized and put into a database in
the back end automatically for us. That
is absolutely critical for the retrieval
stage later. And what's great about this
is it basically treats markdown as the
source of truth. So everything is
appended as markdown and then everything
else is rebuildable later from those
markdown files. So if you lost this
database, you could actually rebuild it
from all the memories that have been
appended to that date. And the other
good thing about it or good and bad you
could say is it captures everything. So
it's not just what automemory from claw
code thinks is the most relevant thing.
It's actually going to capture
absolutely everything. Now you might
wonder is that overkill? Well, we can
come to what Hermes does in a minute and
decide for yourself whether that is
overkill because Hermes actually takes a
completely different approach and it's
closer to what claw code is doing out
the box because actually the agent is
deciding what to save. The agent has
access to a couple of tools inside
Hermes. So add, replace or remove and
what it's doing is adding those to a
memory MD file and a user.md file. So,
similar to what you've seen probably in
OpenClaw or if you've set up your own at
Genico OS, you might have a memory MD
and a user.m MD. But this isn't the same
as Claude's memory. MD. This is a memory
MD with a cap on the number of
characters that retains the most
important information. And we'll talk
about how it does that. So, memory MD
stores environment information, things
you've done, and then user.md is all
about user profile. So, anything you say
about the way you work or the way that
you want to operate, user.md stores. It
also has mechanisms in there for
dduplicating. So whenever the agent
thinks it's going to add, replace, or
remove something important, it will also
check for duplicates and make sure that
it's not writing duplicate information
to our valuable memory space. Now, all
of these are kind of useless unless the
information gets injected at some point,
which we'll talk about next. But the
important thing to know is these caps on
characters enforce consolidation. So
where mems search captures absolutely
everything, the point in the Hermes
memory logic is that it enforces that
consolidation for when it injects that
context later on. But in some ways it is
very similar to memsarch because every
turn it also autosaves the complete raw
transcript to a database in the
background and it uses a curator. So
every 7 days it goes through and prunes
and consolidates all of the information
that we've just talked about. So the
curator's job is to keep everything
clean. What it does is remove the raw
transcripts from that information. So
whilst memarch stores exact raw
transcripts, Hermes actually
consolidates and prunes that
information. So they're actually both
excellent, especially when you compare
it to claw code. And if you look in your
own memory with the automemory, it
barely saves a thing. So memarch and
Hermes go 10x further than the basic
claw code out the box. So which one
would I actually recommend that you use
in this approach? Well, mem search
captures everything automatically with
that stop hook, but it's raw and
unccurated. Hermes is going to capture
our curated facts, especially those that
are going to be put into memory. MD and
user.md, which is lean and intentionally
lean, but if the agent doesn't think to
save something, it's kind of like with
our clawed automemory, it's still
actually grabbing the full transcript
and saving it into something that we can
retrieve from a database at a later
point. So my answer to which one should
you actually use? I actually think we
should combine the logic of both here.
We should use automatic capture for
completeness and then curated facts for
what matters most because this is really
important for the injection of the
context phase. So take the best of both
and combine it. So we've got a long-term
search from this embedded vector
database that we can search by meaning
but also the power of choosing specific
information to store in the memory.mmd
and user.md. So that now that we come to
the injection phase, we can actually
push that information into our context
without having to search through a load
of raw uncurated transcripts in the
background. So memory injection into the
context window is quite misunderstood.
It's not about loading more context in
like we always talk about. It's loading
the right context at the right time
only. So the default behavior of claw
code is when you start a session you
inject the full claude.md and that's why
we want to keep the claw. ND ideally
under 200 lines that goes in with the
system prompt and then before you use a
tool or before claude uses a tool there
is actually a pre-tool use hook which
grabs the memory. MD index looks through
those list of memory files that were
stored earlier and decides does it need
based on your your query to actually go
and research one of those memory files
and inject that into the context too. If
it does, it will inject that in as
additional context inside the
conversation. So this is a pretty decent
starting point, but actually we can
learn a lot from the way Hermes does
this. We already saw that it captured a
user.md and memory.mmd file with more
information that's periodically updated
and consolidated. We can actually inject
those into the context window. But
first, let's quickly cover memarch
because it might surprise you here, but
memarch actually has no injection layer
at all. It just relies on the default
behavior of claw code injection, the
claw.md and the memory.mmd. Mems search
is really built for the recall which
we'll come to. So, think of me search as
storage and search. Basically, a storage
and search library that massively
improves long-term recall. Whereas
Hermes, I think, nails this. So, at the
session start, it basically loads a
frozen snapshot similar to the way that
Claude uses Claude. MD, but it will not
only use the Claude MD, it will
additionally add in the memory MD, the
user.md, and soul.md every single time.
And that comes to around 1,300 tokens
that are put into every single
conversation window. Now, this is per
session because it's a frozen snapshot.
So, it gets cached in the memory. So,
you don't spend 1,300 tokens every time
you send a message. It's just at the
start of a session conversation, the
session ID will have that context save.
So, anything that's saved to memory MD,
user.md, soul.md during the session will
be written to the disk in the background
and will not be loaded into that
conversation, but will be loaded into
the next conversation. So, it's a really
obvious choice for what logic we'd like
to use for the actual injection layer.
And that's let's use claw codes behavior
plus Hermes actual frozen snapshot to
load in the memory. MD, usermd and
soul.md, which as we saw in the storage
stage consolidates recently biased and
most important information inside these
three folders or these three markdown
files. Now, yes, you are loading in
1,300 tokens every single session, but
compared to the huge context windows,
the increased performance you're going
to get from recent consolidated
memories, in my opinion, is worth it.
Now, this is where stuff gets really
interesting in recall because this is
probably the biggest gap that Claude
Code has out the box. Most of the time,
we're not working just on a taskby task
basis with Claude Code. We have a bunch
of clients, we have a bunch of projects
on the go, and actually storing that
information is critical, but recall is
the most important thing. If you can
store as much information as you want,
but if you can't get it out at the right
time, then it's not worth having a good
storage mechanism in the first place.
And claw code out the box has a really
poor dare I say it recall system. So
basically it's user asks about the past
some question about the past. It's going
to check the automemory files which
we've already seen and if it's not been
saved in there it's completely lost. You
might have opened the memory files that
you had from earlier inside your project
repository. It really is quite selective
about what it saved. You probably don't
have a huge amount of information stored
there. So actually recalling past
conversations and information, it's
going to have to just go and troll
through previous conversations you've
had and actually burn through a load of
tokens trying to find relevant
information. And it has no methodology
for doing so right now. Now you can of
course use the resume flag to actually
resume a previous conversation, but you
have to know which session you actually
want to resume to get that context back.
So for claw code, the storage of
information is okay. The injection is
basic with just the claw. MD, but the
recall is actually really weak and where
we can benefit most from external
systems. So, how does that compare to
memarch if a user were to ask about
something from the past week, the past
month, the past 6 months? Well, memarch
has a really powerful three tier
retrieval system that basically only
goes deeper if it needs to. It works on
the same principles of progressive
disclosure. So, a user asks a question
about the past and we're going to use
the memsarch search query. It's
basically going to convert your query
into vectors. So it can go and find in
the vector database where we stored the
information earlier semantic matches for
your query. Then because it's stored as
vectors, we'll also be able to find
matches for monetization, revenue,
price. So it doesn't have to be exact
keyword matches. Like we're actually
searching in the vector database by
meaning here. And it even has a method
to do that by keywords. So the dense
vectors allow it to search by meaning.
The BM25 keywords allow it to actually
keyword match and then it's basically
summarized in one list of these are the
closest matches to your relevant query
that you asked about the past. Now it
will pass that back to the agent first
and if there's nothing that's totally
relevant then it's able to actually go
one level deeper. So at that point it
could stop and actually find really
relevant queries, find exactly what
we're looking for from information in
the past. If that answers the question
great. However, if that does not answer
the question, then it jumps to tier two,
which is mem search expand. And mem
search expand gives it more context,
more metadata, a summary of information
around the match that we potentially
found. And again, if that is not good
enough and we need the raw dialogue,
then it's going to go to the next tier,
level three, which actually has all of
the session dialogue that we had.
Because if you remember, every single
message we send, it's summarized into
bullets and then appended to the memory.
And then that is index. So all of the
raw dialogue is actually saved and we
can retrieve that with level three if we
need to as a last resort. Now all of
these take more tokens as we go down.
But if you need a reliable system for
retrieving information about your
client's project 6 months ago, then mem
search is going to be the one. Now you
might have identified the limitation in
this approach which is if we're asking
about the past, it immediately thinks
okay instead of searching the local
context, let's go and do a database
query. So that's going to be slower than
just checking our local in context
memory. So Hermes uses a really clever
approach for this. First, instead of
going deeper into the database, it's
actually just going to check our
memory.mmd like has the question that
the user has asked been actually
accessible via just the memory. MD,
which means it can actually get it from
the context that it's already received.
So the power in injecting this frozen
snapshot means that actually for some
queries it's going to be able to be
answered just from the context that's
already in the memory and that will
basically be zero cost and
instantaneously accessible. So it should
in theory always search the context of
that existing conversation before it
goes down to the levels and searches the
database. So if it is not found in there
then it goes deeper and searches the
sessions and we already mentioned those
were stored in a database the same as we
did for me search but instead of being a
vector database is just searching by
keywords effectively. So then what it's
going to do is basically return the top
three matching se sessions by relevance
and summarize it using Gemini flash and
pass that back into the agent. So Hermes
is really good at exact keyword
matching. So, if we were to ask it about
pricing, it could find things about
pricing, but it might not necessarily
find things about revenue because that's
by meaning and not keywords. However,
they do do one really smart thing which
we're going to adapt and use, which is
inject this memory.m MD into the
conversation history and then also by
default as a level zero, check that
memory.mmd. So, check what's already in
context before jumping down into the
memarch hybrid search, the memarch
expand, and the level three down here.
So what we'd actually ideally do is grab
this memory.mmd check and put that into
the mem search flow so that we have a
hybrid of both of those. So we can treat
this step as almost like a level zero
between memarch and Hermes. So that we
actually check what's already in context
before we go deeper and check the vector
database. So user asks about the past.
It's going to check the memory MD and
the context that's in that existing
window. And if not found, then it's
going to go on to the mem search to
start searching the vector database by
keyword and meaning and then continue to
level two and level three if it needs to
do so. So that's a lot of information.
Now, how do you actually set this up for
yourself and take the best elements of
each system that can be worked together?
So here's what I'd actually recommend
when taking the best from each system.
So let's run through store, inject, and
recall and the life cycle of a
conversation as it happens. So, but we
will of course leverage everything
that's already built into claw code that
works well as best practice. So as a
conversation happens, we're going to
leverage the automemory which is built
in and saves those memory files to the
claude global folder for us. But after
every turn completes, we're going to add
in the mem search stop hook. That's
basically going to capture word for word
all of our transcript of our
conversation so that those can be put
into a daily memory. But what we want to
do is maintain a memory.mmd and a
user.md file so that actually if the
agent decides that something is
important, it's not just relying on claw
code to add, replace or remove into
memory. MD or user.md files. Now that
covers actually storing more context so
that we can actually retrieve it later.
We of course also leverage the vector
database of memarch which is actually
consolidating this information into
long-term semantically searchable
memory. So basically we're going to run
a nightly job to consolidate all the
information that were put into that
database. All the transcripts, all the
raw transcripts are going to be
consolidated using this mem search index
every single night. And if all of this
is sounding a little bit too complex for
you to actually go and set up, then I'm
going to show you later where we've got
an exact guide for free on how to give
this plan to claw code and it will go
through all your file systems and work
out how to actually implement this and
do all the installations for you. Now
injection, we actually leveraged Hermes
logic. So when the session starts, we
want to inject a little bit more context
than just claw.md. We want to inject the
soul.md, the user.md, memory.md, and
then possibly today's log. If you could
also inject yesterday's log if you think
that would be relevant too. So that
would be 3,000 tokens that are cached at
the start of every session which will
really be important when we come to
actually recalling it. So then we jump
onto the recall segment of the flow. And
what we've done here is combine the tier
zero of Hermes where we check the memory
MD and daily log first. So those are
injected inside the system prompt every
time we send a message but they're
cached. So what we're doing is basically
before digging deeper into the vector
database to search past history, we
check the local recent data that's been
loaded into the conversation already. So
memory MD and daily log that has zero
cost and it's also pretty much immediate
because it already has it in context. If
that is not found, then we jump onto the
mem search traditional level one, level
two, level three where we search the
queries using the hybrid keyword and
semantic or vector search. We then
expand those with the chunks and then if
we do not find the information still
then we can actually pass the raw
transcripts and pass that information
back to the agents. So this setup gives
us the ability to actually search
information really quickly from local
recent files and prioritize those but
also gives us the ability to actually
search further back in less recent
history to recall all knowledge to the
point where we can literally pull out
the raw dialogue at the end. The one
thing I want you to take away is none of
this is complicated individually, but
it's all about preserving best practice
for storage, injection, and recall so
that we can massively improve the memory
usage inside your claw code sessions. If
you're working on projects and multiple
clients, then this is an absolute
must-have. And I know Anthropic are
working on their own memory systems, but
right now it's far far behind what you
can get from systems that are currently
open source and free to access. Now,
I'll link below a completely free plan.
MD document for you to pass this into
Claude and set it up for yourself. Now,
if you do want this straight out the box
done for you, you know it's going to
work well, then we'll be implementing
this inside our own Aentic operating
system next week. That's also linked
down inside the academy in the
description below. Now, if you want to
see what other options I considered for
memory, check out the next video. Thanks
for watching.